SSHDOS v0.93 Copyright (c) 2000-2002 Nagy Daniel
Release date: 07-20-2002


COPYRIGHT 컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴

	SSHDOS
	Copyright (c) 2000-2002 Nagy Daniel
	This program is distributed under the terms of the GNU General
	Public License. Please read the copying file for details.

	Portions:

	WATTCP library
	Copyright (c) 1990, 1991, 1992, 1993 Erick Engelke
	Portions Copyright (c) 1993  Quentin Smart
	Portions Copyright (c) 1991  University of Waterloo
	Portions Copyright (c) 1990  National Center for Supercomputer
				     Applications
	Portions Copyright (c) 1990  Clarkson University
	Portions Copyright (c) 1983, 1986, Imagen Corporation
	The SSHDOS source package contains the unmodified WATTCP
	code in compiled library format, which is permitted according
	to the WATTCP license.
	http://www.wattcp.com

	ZLIB library
	Copyright (C) 1995-1998 Jean-loup Gailly and Mark Adler
	The SSHDOS source package contains the ZLIB library in
	compiled library format, which is permitted according to
	the ZLIB license.
	http://www.gzip.org

	PuTTY
	Copyright (c) 1997-2002 Simon Tatham
	PuTTY is distributed under the terms of the MIT licence.
	http://www.chiark.greenend.org.uk/~sgtatham/putty/

	CVT100
	Copyright (c) 1988 Jerry Joplin (CVT100)
	Portions copyright (c) 1981, 1988 Trustees of Columbia University
					  in the City of New York
	Permission is granted to any individual or institution
	to use, copy, or redistribute this program and
	documentation as long as it is not sold for profit and
	as long as the Columbia copyright notice is retained.
	http://www.simtel.net/pub/simtelnet/msdos/commprog/cvt100.zip


INTRODUCTION 컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴

	SSHDOS is an SSH client which provides a telnet-like interactive
	login shell to remote hosts. It can be used to run commands on
	remote hosts as well.

	SCPDOS is a secure file transfer utility, which can transfer a
	file from remote to local or from local to remote machines.
	Only one file can be transferred at a time.

	TELNET is the good old telnet client.

	These programs can run on low-end machines (8086+) when
	compiled with real-mode compilers (Turbo or Borland C),
	so it's an ideal solution to connect from el-cheapo machines
	or DOS compatible PDAs.
	The DJGPP version is much faster, but it requires at least
	a 386 machine.

	SSHDOS currently supports 3DES and blowfish ciphers. Blowfish
	is a bit faster, so I recommend using it (if the server supports
	it).

	The implemented SSH protocol version is 1.5.

	SSHDOS and SCPDOS supports RSA and password authentication.
	RSA authentication is tried first, by using the IDENTITY file
	in the local directory. If it's not available, password
	authentication follows.

	SSHDOS is based on the WATTCP TCP/IP library, Putty SSH client
	for Windows, the ZLIB compression library and the CVT100
	terminal emulation package.


INSTALLATION 컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴

	Unzip the package with subdirectory support (pkunzip -d).

	If you have the binary package, no installation is needed.
	Edit the wattcp.cfg and hosts file first, then install a packet
	driver (or set up your PPP connection if you have a modem).

	The source package contains the WATTCP and ZLIB libraries for
	Borland C 3.1 and DJGPP 2.03. If you want to use an other
	compiler, you must download the original WATTCP and ZLIB
	packages and recompile them too.
	To build the binaries, modify the makefile (borlandc.mak or
	djgpp.mak), then run 'make -f filename', where 'filename' is
	the proper makefile.

	Tested compilers:
	- Borland C 3.1
	- Turbo C 2.01
	- DJGPP 2.03 (GCC 3.04)

	Check out the CONTRIB subdirectory for enhancements from
	other authors!


DOCUMENTATION 컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴

	To get help for SSHDOS and SCPDOS, please use the /? command
	line option.

	You can use your own keymap file using the -k command line
	option. Sample keymap files are included for linux, vt100 and
	xterm-color terminals (with .kbd extension). The default is
	xterm emulation. The xterm keymap is hard-wired in SSHDOS, so
	the keymap files should only contain differences to the original
	xterm keymap.

	If the connection seems to be broken and no disconnection
	happens automatically, you may terminate SSHDOS and TELNET by
	pressing the ALT-X key combination.

	DOS shell can be invoked using the ALT-E key combination.


EXAMPLES컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴

	Connect to a linux box using blowfish cipher:
	sshdos -c blowfish -t linux -k linux.kbd username hostname

	Connect to a host using the 386 version and compression:
	sshd386 -C username hostname

	Connect and run a shell script called 'scriptname':
	sshdos username hostname nohup scriptname &

	Copy a local file to a remote host:
	scpdos localfile username@hostname:remotefile

	Copy a remote file to the local machine:
	scpdos username@hostname:remotefile localfile

	Copy a local directory recursively to a remote host,
	with time attributes of files preserved:
	scpdos -p -r localdir\*.* username@hostname:remotedir/

	Create a telnet connection to a POP3 port on a remote host:
	telnet -p 110 hostname


OFFICIAL SITE 컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴

The official distribution site is http://sshdos.sourceforge.net

The package is available in both executable and source format.
Contact: nagyd@users.sourceforge.net
